1. Introduction 
Geospatial science has developed as a vibrant field characterised by intellectual vigour, conceptual 
expansion, and improved analytical skills as a consequence of the Quantitative Revolution in the subject 
of geography through a spatially integrated socio-environmental science that outshines prior 
disciplinary ties, borders, and limitations (Berry et al., 2008). Geospatial science, commonly referred 
to as geomatics (Aina 2012), is a multidisciplinary discipline that focuses on comprehending, 
analysing, and visualising spatial data about the Earth's surface using information technology to 
describe the connections between geography, individuals, places, and Earth processes. Technologies 
like Global Positioning System (GPS), Geographic Information Systems (GIS), and remote sensing are 
frequently used as observational, measuring, and analytical tools, helping in the understanding of 
numerous events by providing the information with a spatial context. Geospatial technology is being 
used increasingly in every industry today, including resource management, disaster management, 
forestry, logistics, infrastructure planning, and the study of climate change and other environmental 
issues (Dangermond and Goodchild, 2020). Geospatial technology and the information created are 
becoming increasingly significant in all economic sectors, making the economy, society, and the 
environment an indispensable pillar of sustainable development. (Scott and Rajabifard, 2017). Thus, 
geospatial science and technology support disaster management (Ghosh and Mukherjee, 2023), 
infrastructure planning, environmental monitoring (Sanyal and Chowdhury, 2023), as well as 
location-based services.  
Digital Twin's concept involves creating virtual models of physical objects and systems to reproduce 
their real-world counterparts as accurately as possible. They capture both the static and dynamic 
behaviour of objects or systems. Digital twin finds their applications in various fields, starting from 
real-time monitoring of objects, maintenance and optimisation of systems, designing prototypes 
virtually before building them to simulating and predicting climate change and monitoring the 
performance of aircraft and grid systems. In the backdrop of facing the change and modernisation of 
manufacturing sectors and changing to smart manufacturing, the digital twin, as a novel technological 
1 
tool for implementing smart manufacturing, has drawn numerous scholars' research and discussion. 
Although this notion has been offered for some time, there are few project uses of a digital twin as a 
technical instrument, the referenceable expertise is barely any, and the reference content is the primarily 
theoretical and conceptual study (Zhou et al., 2022). Geospatial Digital Twin (GDT) emphasizes the 
geospatial attributes of the geographical settings, incorporating precise location and spatial layers for 
building a comprehensive knowledge of the spatial environment and its entities. Therefore, the 
geospatial concept and network between the entities are one of the core parts of GDT. Thus, 
implementing GDT is not a straightforward process and needs a variety of spatial computing 
technologies (Eunus et al., 2023), including graph theory. 
Graph algorithms are used extensively in location-based services and analysis (Wang et al., 2019). 
Graph algorithms analyse spatial connections and relationships between two points (Demšar et al. 2008) 
or locations. Graph theory is the study of the mathematical structures known as graphs, which are used 
to represent pairwise interactions between objects (Singh 2014) (Table 1). Graphs may be spatial or 
non-spatial graphs, which further contain both directed and undirected graphs with weighted and unweighted 
components (Table 2). Real spatial or non-spatial networks possess characteristics specific to one of the 
following four graph types: regular, random, small world, and scale-free (Anderson and Dragićević 
2020). An adjacency matrix can be used to depict the organisation of these graphs (Anderson et al., 
2020). 
The initial use of graph theory (Euler et al., 1741), 200 years earlier, was a location-based problem 
known as "Seven Bridges of Konigsberg", where Euler demonstrated that it was impossible to travel 
over all seven of the bridges that connect the islands without ever using the same bridge twice. This 
approach, also known as network science, is shown by the shortest path routing algorithms (Table 3) 
between two points (Dijkstra et al., 1959). The theorem was developed as a result of Euler's 
discoveries, which served as the cornerstone of network science. The findings also led to the conclusion 
that Graph Theory may be used to uncover and represent many structural properties (Anderson et al., 
2020). In the 19th century, Cayley's studies formed the beginning of enumerative graph theory, using 
trees as the types of graphs, and focused on calculating the number of certain types of graphs (Bell et 
al., 2015). Social network analysis, one of the earliest fields of application (de Nooy et al., 2005), was 
where the three types of centrality metrics were initially established (Freeman et al., 1979). In social 
networks, vertices stand in for people or institutions, and edges show their connections to one another. 
In social network analysis, a person's reachability—or how readily information can go to that person—
 is described by their degree and closeness centralities. Journey from then till today, graph theory has 
extended its applications from social media network cybersecurity to fields of bioinformatics and 
cryptography. With the increase in data connectedness and breakthroughs in graph technology, valuable 
insights are obtained when integrated with queries, statistics, algorithms, ML, and AI (Anderson et al., 
2020).  
The objective of this article is to understand some fundamental concepts and examples of graph 
algorithms, their applications in geospatial science (Figure 1 and Table 4), digital twin, and the 
methods by which geographic data, network sciences, and graph algorithms can be used to represent, 
analyse, and simulate complex geographical systems for better decision-making. 