Basic Concepts
 Networks or graphs are collections of elements (nodes, 
vertices) and their pairwise links (edges, connections) 
which, in their simplest form, can be summarized in 
the form of a connection (or adjacency) matrix. The 
complete set of all pairwise connections defines the 
graph’s topology, providing a complete map of all rela
tions among nodes and edges. Brain nodes may be in
dividual neurons or entire brain regions, depending on 
the measurement technique. Edges can take on binary 
or weighted values, and they can be directed or undi
rected, depending on how interactions are estimated 
from empirical data. The selection of appropriate graph 
theory methods for modeling and analyzing empirical 
data requires that the nature of the edge representation 
is taken into account.6,9 Put differently, not all graph 
theory methods fit all purposes.
 The two most common species of brain graphs de
scribe structural and functional connectivity among 
neural elements. Structural graphs are generally sparse 
(most possible structural connections in a given ner
vous systems do not exist) and temporally relatively 
stable (but subject to plasticity and development). In 
contrast, functional graphs record statistical dependen
cies among neuronal time series, and hence are often 
dense and highly variable across time. The dichotomy of 
structural and functional graphs is important to consid
er, as each domain draws on a specific subset of graph 
theory methods that are commensurate with the origin 
of the data.
 The definition of nodes generally requires sophis
ticated data-processing pipelines and is the subject of 
much methodological discussion. In whole-brain net
works acquired with neuroimaging, nodes are often 
derived from a parcellation of the original voxel-level 
data, designed to extract coherent brain “areas” that 
form the building blocks of structural or functional 
brain networks. Some approaches leverage anatomical 
templates, others pursue parcellation in a data-driven 
manner, eg, by boundary detection and clustering pat
terns of connectivity.14 A recent multimodal study em
ployed machine learning to extract coherent brain re
gions on the basis of several different anatomical and 
functional criteria.15 Node definition is considerably 
more straightforward in studies of circuits and neuro
nal populations, where individual neurons are natural 
candidates for individual network nodes.
 A major simplification inherent in most current ap
plications of graph theory is the assumption that, within 
a given network representation, all nodes and edges 
are identical and homogeneous. Annotation of nodes 
and edges can address this limitation of simple graphs, 
by allowing additional layers of data to be linked to 
network elements, which can be useful for identify
ing biologically meaningful network communities.16 A 
further elaboration of simple graphs is the inclusion of 
multidimensional relationships which can be expressed 
in multilayer networks,17 composed of different layers 
that encode different types of interactions (eg, synap
tic links, temporal correlations, transmitter systems, or 
gene coexpression).
 Graphs can be investigated at different levels of 
scale, and specific measures capture graph attributes at 
local (nodal) and global (network-wide) scales.6 Nodal 
measures include simple statistics such as node degree 
or strength, while global measures express network
wide attributes such as the path length or the efficiency. 
Intermediate scales can be accessed via hierarchical 
neighborhoods around single graph elements,18 or by 
considering subgraphs or motifs.19,20 Motifs are defined 
as subsets of network nodes and their mutual edges 
whose patterns of connectivity can be classified into 
distinct motif categories. In empirical networks, these 
categories often occur in characteristic frequencies that 
 can be compared with distributions from appropriate 
(random) null models. In the brain, motif analysis has 
been applied to structural20 and functional graphs.21
 Most highly resolved structural brain networks are 
not fully, or even densely, connected. In such sparsely 
connected graphs, the minimal topological distance be
tween two nodes, ie, the length of the shortest path, often 
involves multiple steps. Network paths are composed 
of unique edges that are traversed only once, while the 
usually much more abundant walks between two nodes 
can use edges any number of times. Paths and walks are 
considered important for the flow of signals and com
munication,22 and are the basis for popular graph met
rics such as the so-called efficiency which defines the 
global capacity of a graph to pass information via short 
paths. Importantly, concepts of path lengths and effi
ciency are most naturally applied to brain graphs that 
represent structural connectivity. In contrast, they have 
rather different (and potentially problematic) interpre
tations when applied to functional connectivity. The 
distinction derives from the nature of functional con
nectivity which reports statistical associations among 
neural time series rather than a web of physical links 
that propagates neural signals.